You
know,
we have gone for federal funding for a lot of
things. And we have gotten some UDAG funds. We have
gotten some EDA funds. We have gotten some urban
transit funds,
manpower programs. public works projects that we
have. And we go on and on and on. That includes
drainage and flood control through the U.S. Board
of Engineers. Of course, the Federal Highway
System. So, yes, we are more involved with the
federal government
. The Settlement is 100% federal. And there you had
a direct relationship with, I guess, two
presidents at that time, Kennedy and Johnson.
Nester, could you briefly describe how your
department is organized, the basic structure of
it? Sure. When I took over the department, we had
the traditional hierarchy of organization. We
had the director, the assistant director, and we
had eight or ten divisions. We had subdivisions,
zoning, transportation,
relocation, graphics, cartography.
traditional system. After my assistant director
of planning retired Mr. Bill Adams in 1980, early
1983, I reorganized the office to change the whole
pattern of it. I felt that the office should not
have, or that it was rather impractical to have the
director and the assistant director and then all
of the subdivisions. So I reorganized with a
director and three division chiefs.
The three division chiefs, having to beat Joe
Rubio, Judy Price, and Ned Kompis, all have under
them several subdivisions that are grouped
together by
the nature of work that they do. For example, Joe
Rubio handles everything that has to do with The
plant commission has to do with now things, today
things, subdivisions, zoning, site plan
reviews, special permits.
Everything that has to do with the development
aspects that is ongoing right now has to do with
annexations that are ongoing. So that is what is
commonly known as current planning. And I put Judy
Price in charge of comprehensive planning and
transportation, transportation and . She
actually wears three hats.
She is the chief of comprehensive planning, she is
the MPO for the city, and she is the person in charge
of the major thoroughfare plan or all
thoroughfare planning in the city.
So she has under her wing demographics, she has
encompassed planning and everything that has to
do with transportation including doing the
grants for the public transit system. Then I have
the third, which is Ned Comfort, who is in charge of
urban design. And urban design is involved with
graphics, cryptography, design plans that are
ongoing today. such as downtown revitalization,
such as neighborhood revitalization, such as
doing neighborhood commercial and housing
programs. He's also in charge of relocation,
which goes very well with this. So that's
basically how I have it set up. The neat thing about
this particular program that I have is that I took
the assistant director position and divided its
powers into the three and promoted the three. And
they are not only supervisory in nature, but they
are also working technicians, working
professionals that realize that they are not only
in charge of their division, But they are also
required to produce work instead of being
the overseer, which generally an assistant
director, that's what he does.
You talk to your assistant, and your assistant
then turns around and assigns and sees that things
get done. But in very few instances do you have an
assistant director of any department feel that,
aside from general supervision, that he is not
expected to do it. One question that I want to be
sure to ask you is, taking a look into the future,
what
future direction do you see for El Paso's
planning? Are there any changes in the wind? Or any
changes that you feel are most likely to occur?
First of all, I have a very strong feeling that
we are very, very short-handed manpower. How many
staff do you have? I have approximately 36 right
now, 35 or 36. And out of that, how many would you
classify as professional planners?
Give or take 12. I mean, truly professional
planners in various processes, for comp planning
or subdivisions and that sort of thing. My biggest
complaint is that the city of El Paso is growing.
We're half a million people. We are extremely
tight in terms of personnel. We have lost some very
key people in the past several months. And there is
no help in sight that I can see to request
additional personnel. As I mentioned to you in the
beginning, back in the 60s, we enjoyed some
excellent manning tables for the department. We
had more help than we needed. Consequently, we
used to carry two or three vacant positions from
year to year. Planner twos and planner threes,
which is, you know, top of the line. And nobody
really cared whether you would carry these vacant
positions from year to year. You'd say, well,
yeah, I've got two or three positions vacant, but I
won't fill them next year. Today, it is...
It is just, you know, if you have a vacant position
and you go to the budget, you're going to lose it.
It's going to be wiped out. To get another body in
the department is going to be extremely
difficult. So what I'm really saying is as the city
grows bigger and bigger, we're getting skimpier
and skimpier, and that is the biggest challenge
challenge, problem, the planning problem is
facing right now. That's number one. By
not fulfilling the overall mission of planning,
it is entirely possible that we could lose some
clout with the mayor and council. You know, you can
just do so much with what you have and you're going
to from time to time become, you're going to slip or
you're going to not do the job that you would like to
do. Consequently, your image, credibility, this
political position in the organization may They
get hurt. That's a fear. Because historically
here, planning has played a major role in local
government. And it would be a shame if now through
personnel shortages and so forth, that were to
change. That's a possibility. There's also a...
danger that
the Public Works Office may be gaining
political clout and may position to hurt the
Department of Planning. That's my personal
observation. There always seems to be kind of a
historic rivalry between the two departments in
every city, subtle or overt. Sure. And it's just
natural because of all the departments, we seem to
be able to understand a more comprehensive view of
the city. It probably works. kind of six or eight
major departments under his belt, like streets,
sanitation, traffic and transportation,
engineering, public works. There's another one
in there. So you're talking about what is
generally classified as a super department. And
so there's obviously more interest or there's
more interplay between that and the middle
council than a pure, simple department.
I'm going to have to leave, too. I got to go. Aside
from the personnel and the possible diminution
of, as it were, clout in the city. Do you see any
other changes in the future planning in El Paso?
The type of planning or the way you spend your
resources?
Not really. I think the biggest challenge of your
contact is to keep up with development changes
where we are, you know, in rhythm with the rest of
the country in terms of innovative ways of doing
things such as performance standards, for one, or
performance zoning, new PODs, new residential
developments requiring flexibility as opposed
to the traditional zoning districts.
I think we need to keep an open mind without
hindering
quality. For instance, the big issue of narrower
streets, where you don't need bigger streets, a
hierarchical streets program, smaller lots,
higher densities. changing patterns of
community development, which is our business.
What I'm saying is I'm hoping that we can at least
keep an open mind and be able to stay up with current
events. The other issue is to get fully
computerized.
We are promised that this year we will be
computerized in plenty. We've been fighting for
computerization for the last two years.
Things work slow, but I think we will be able to
persuade the Mayor and Council to do something.
We're very close to obeying that. Minister, thank
you very much. I appreciate it.
He was tired, I think, yes. Well, he's always
tired, what a job. Tired, tired, you're always
tired. Now let's see if this is recording.
This is March 15th, 1985, and we are in the kitchen
of Mrs. Jonathan Cunningham, otherwise known as
Ann. And Mrs. Cunningham followed the career of
her husband quite closely. And Ann, I want to ask
you, would you recall how it was that you and
Jonathan first met? And then take it from there to
the early years of his career, and then all of that,
and then how it came to be that you located in El
Paso. Yes. I recall well that we met as graduate
students at the University of Chicago. We
attended lectures together. In fact, one man I
distinctly remember, Rexford Tugwell, gave a
fine planning lecture about his work in Puerto
Rico. Jonathan and I shared many happy memories of
the University of Chicago, where he was LD White's
administrative assistant and instructor in one
of his many fine classes in public
administration. Then John's role in World War II
was with the military intelligence. He did a great
deal of mapping. for the Air Transport Command in
the South Pacific, received the Bronze Star Medal
for his research and writing about air routes that
could be used with efficiency and with great
finesse, let's say, to bring troops and supplies.
to the South Pacific during World War II. After the
war, Jonathan went back to the University of
Chicago and was an all but dissertation person in
the field of public administration. Then his
first professional job after the war was at
Whitman College, where he taught political
science. public administration, was indeed
chairman of the political science department
there. And at the same time, he assumed the duties
of planning director for the little village of
Walla Walla and did write their planning and
zoning ordinance for them. Within a few years, he
became so attracted to planning that he moved to
Spokane, Washington, where he was director of
county planning for about two three years and then
we moved on to Olympia Washington where John
became the first regional planner of the Puget
Sound area and formed the Puget Sound Regional
Planning Council one of the first regional
planning councils in the United States as I
remember We came to El Paso because John was
essentially a Southwestern-er, basically,
spiritually, in every way a Southwestern-er. He
had a fine boyhood and youth in New Mexico and was
attracted to the region always. When Mayor
Raymond Telles invited him to be a planning
director, Do you remember how Teas spelled his
last name? T-E-L-L-E-S, Teas. When Teas invited
Jonathan to be planning director, he was honored
and sacrificed a good career in the Northwest and a
bit of salary to come down and be planning director
for the city of El Paso. And he delighted in the new
challenge. It was indeed a challenge. And he, I can
honestly say, really really
loved his work in El Paso because it did demand the
best of him. And he continually felt that because
he knew the region, he could contribute a great
deal to the planning efforts for this community.
Well, John seemed to know how to relate to the
people here in the Southwest, to all sorts of
people. poor, rich, powerful, not so powerful,
and he understood them. He was a people planner.
And although he was not bilingual, he had many
friends in Mexico and in Juarez. And he was liked by
the Mexican-American population in El Paso very
much. He was invited to their LULAC functions. He
was invited to teach at the university in Juarez.
They provided him with an interpreter,
translator, excuse me. And he taught a course in
city planning administration at UT El Paso and
found time generally to serve the universities in
the area. He also gave freely of his time and
speaking ability to New Mexico State University.
So he had a fine time here as a planner and as a
professional teacher. Essentially, he
conceived the idea of a fine city planner as also
being a teacher because he felt that people needed
to be educated as to what the real role of city
planning was and what it could do for a community
and what it ought to be thinking of doing and what
its goal should be. So he made city planning not
only a career, but he made it a teaching
dedication. And on that, that reminds me of when I
first met Jonathan in 1970 at the San Antonio
conference of the Gulf Southwest chapter of AIP. I
had just been authorized by the then president,
Vernon Henry, to proceed with the development of a
short course for planning commissioners. And
Jonathan was one of the first supporters of such a
move on the part of the chapter, because he did
believe in education of planning commissioners
and the general public. So he was on the original
task force for the short course for planning
commissioners, which, of course, now has evolved
into the Educational Foundation, which is
separately incorporated and is one of the
probably one of the best activities that the
chapter has to its credit. And it received a
National Honor Award for the development of this
short course. I'm glad to hear that, because he did
feel it was extremely important. Now, I consider
the acquisition of the Chamizal National Park one
of Jonathan's great achievements for El Paso. He
had good contacts in the Department of the
Interior. And when he found out that there was to be
a transfer of land between the two countries,
Jonathan conceived the idea that land should be
set aside within the city of El Paso for a national
park. And he did indeed pursue that vigorously in
Washington and did effectuate the idea and
promote it and did get it for the city and it's still
much used. It's a cultural center for the city. The
administrator Frank Smith and John were good
friends and Frank often tells me that if it were not
for John that we would not have the Shamizel
National Park there and it would not be such a a
great inspiration to this community, which does
need a great deal of cultural inspiration. Okay.
Well, looking back on planning in El Paso since
you've been here, several
things have happened in addition to the Chamazul
Park and the redefinition of the international
boundary between Mexico and Texas. I
think you mentioned previously that there was a
series of neighborhood parks that were promoted
as a policy by John? Yes. He loved the city of
Spokane because it had so many wonderful city
parks. In fact, I believe Spokane, Washington is
still noted for its numerous park plans and
developments. When Jonathan came to El Paso, he
did note immediately the few parks in the area. And
this was one of his dedications to acquire and to
develop more parkland for the city. And he was
especially instrumental in getting the Armijo
Park recreational center developed, which is
used constantly in South El Paso. He promoted the
idea with the park department director that we
should have more parks, and he worked
continuously with him. to acquire more parks for
the city of El Paso. And although we haven't as many
as Spokane, we do have our fair share and they are
well located in every section of the city now. I
know that he was an advocate of George Kessler's
planning and caused an abstract of Kessler's 1925
plan for El Paso to be reprinted. and distributed
on the occasion of its anniversary. And as such, he
also advocated comprehensive planning and made
sure that El Paso moved constantly in that
direction rather than in the direction of the
currently more popular type of policy plans.
Would you like to comment on that? I know that
whenever he had a chance, whenever he had people
who could write that he could depend upon on his
staff, he tried to update the plan for El Paso and
worked so hard to do that and to get a consensus of
view and approval for his plans. Each year he
published
report too from the city planning department of
the achievements of the past year and noted what
had been done with maps and illustrations so that
anyone wishing to keep track of the city planning
department and know what how the city was growing
and what planning was being done could consult
those publications he was very proud of the
publications that came out of his office and they
were well done, well written, and beautifully
printed. I think it would be a good idea to be able to
use excerpts of some of those in the book. Yes. Yes,
my daughter and I are planning to catalog the
publications we have and they are numerous.
Jonathan was with the department for 20 years and
he did publish and I'm sorry that he's perished but
some of his ideas live on and he's still well
thought of in the community and many do speak to me
and tell me that they appreciated his efforts on
behalf of this city.
El Paso doesn't have a city manager. And I heard it
said some years ago that the nearest thing that El
Paso had to a city manager was Jonathan, because he
considered planning to be so important with
respect to the political arena. And he kept close
to it and kept the mayor and the council informed
and more or less served as the planning arm of the
city council and the mayor, particularly the
mayor. Well, his concept of what the city needed
here was, I believe, an interdepartmental
communication route
of ideas. And he did set up, as I recall, meetings
for the department heads of the city to discuss and
promote and inform each other of what they were
doing so that there was never a lack of
communication between department heads of the
procedures in various departments. And this, I
understand, was helpful. No, Jonathan really was
not. a city manager in essence he was an
understated person many times with his equals and
superiors he was looked to for advice by as you
pointed out businessmen and men who were just
beginning to develop as leaders in this
community.